---
layout: page
meta-title: Starting Haskell
title: Functional programming with Haskell
slug: haskell-lambdas
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags:
 - Haskell 
 - lambdas
 - functional
---

Investigating Haskell.
-------------------------

Haskell is lovely, it's beautiful but is it useful for a 
coder like me or you? I thought I'd try the Haskell functional programming course on EDX to find out.

<div id="social">
    <iframe id="gh-fork" src="http://ghbtns.com/github-btn.html?user=codingsteve&repo=fp101x&type=fork" allowtransparency="true" frameborder="0" scrolling="0" width="55px" height="20px"></iframe>
    <a href="https://twitter.com/codingSteve" class="twitter-follow-button" data-show-count="false" data-lang="en">Follow @codingSteve</a>
    <a href="https://twitter.com/share" class="twitter-share-button" data-url="{{ post.url}}" data-via="codingSteve" data-lang="en">Tweet</a>
</div>

<!--more-->


The coolest thing I've written so far is the three lines of code
below. The EDX exercises often ask you to identify the correct 
implementations from a few variations of the same function.
Being a lazy developer I'm not prepared to manually exercise the 
functions, I'll let Haskell do that for me. 


    43 t  f (a,b,c) = (f a b) == c
    44 
    45 test f       = and (map (\(a,b,c) -> t  f (a,b,c)) bs)
    46 
    47 tests        = map (\(n,f) -> (n,test f)) fs


##Wait, what ‽ 

Agreed it's not quite check summed line noise but it's not far off. 
There are a few things to cover in the three dense lines above

###lambda functions
These are anonymous functions and are available in 
modern languages like perl and scala. In Haskell they look like
this:

    \ x -> x + 1

You read it: lambda x returns x plus one. 

###Functions

Functions can be passed about as arguments to other functions or as members in a list. This is very powerful and similar to an anonymous sub routine in Perl or an implementation of Runnable in Java. 

###Tuples

Tuples are a really handy data structure for passing related groups of data about. In the Java world you'd need to define a small class or just use an object array. Scala supports them and has some cute syntactic sugar similar to perl's "fat commas"


###Maps

Map in Haskell allows you to run a function on each element of a list and return another list. There's a bit more to it but at a basic level that's enough to get started. 

We supply a function and a list to operate on like this

    map (\x → x + 1) [1,2,3]
    [2,3,4]

##But what does it do?


###Line 43

    43 t  f (a,b,c) = (f a b) == c
    
This defines a function called `t` (Haskell programmers are big on brevity) which takes two arguments one is a function `f` and the second is the tuple `(a,b,c)`. We then call our supplied function with the first two items in the tuple and test whether the result is equal to the third. It's running a test.


###Line 45

    45 test f       = and (map (\(a,b,c) -> t  f (a,b,c)) bs)

This time we define a function called test which takes the function `f` as its argument. 
We're doing two things in the function. 
1. Run our function `t` to check the output of `f` for a specific element of `bs` 
2. Collapse the list of booleans to a single value using `and`. 

###Line 47

    47 tests        = map (\(n,f) -> (n,test f)) fs

Finally we define tests which represents our entire test suite. It calls `test f` for each element of the list of functions `fs` and returns us a list of tuples showing which functions passed all th tests and which failed. 

##Which is all very interesting but does it improve my code in the real world ? 

No, not really but it's great fun. 




